+++
title = "In-Transit Molecular Dynamics Analysis with Apache Flink"
date = 2018-11-12
draft = false

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Henrique C. Zanúz", "Bruno Raffin", "Omar A. Mures", "Emilio J. Padrón"]

# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference paper
# 2 = Journal article
# 3 = Manuscript
# 4 = Report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book section
publication_types = ["1"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
publication = "In *In Situ Infrastructures for Enabling Extreme-Scale Analysis and Visualization (ISAV'18)*."
publication_short = "In *ISAV*"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "In this paper, an on-line parallel analytics framework is proposed to process and store *in transit* all the data being generated by a Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation run using staging nodes in the same cluster executing the simulation. The implementation and deployment of such a parallel workflow with standard HPC tools, managing problems such as data partitioning and load balancing, can be a hard task for scientists.  In this paper we propose to leverage Apache Flink, a scalable stream processing engine from the Big Data domain, in this HPC context.  Flink enables to program analyses within a simple window based map/reduce model, while the runtime takes care of the deployment, load balancing and fault tolerance. We build a complete in transit analytics workflow, connecting an MD simulation to Apache Flink and to a distributed database, Apache HBase, to persist all the desired data. To demonstrate the expressivity of this programming model and its suitability for HPC scientific environments, two common analytics in the MD field have been implemented. We assessed the performance of this framework, concluding that it can handle simulations of sizes used in the literature while providing an effective and versatile tool for scientists to easily incorporate on-line parallel analytics in their current workflows."
# abstract_short = ""

# Is this a featured publication? (true/false)
featured = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references 
#   `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
#projects = ["internal-project"]

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["High Performance Data Analytics", "Data Analytics", "Scientific Data", "Numerical Simulation", "Flink"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = "https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01889939"
#url_code = "#"
#url_dataset = "#"
#url_project = ""
#url_slides = "#"
#url_video = "#"
#url_poster = "#"
#url_source = "#"

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
#url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "http://example.org"}]

# Digital Object Identifier (DOI)
doi = "10.1145/3281464.3281469"

# Does this page contain LaTeX math? (true/false)
math = false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
[image]
  # Caption (optional)
  caption = "Diagram of the proposed framework deployed on 8 nodes."

  # Focal point (optional)
  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point = ""
+++

